# Template Parameter: Variadic Templates
In this lesson, we will learn about one of the powerful new tools of C++11: variadic templates.

We'll cover the following
- Parameter pack

A variadic template is a template with an arbitrary number of parameters.
```
template <typename ... Args>
void variadicTemplate(Args ... args){ . . . . }
```

## Parameter pack
- By using the ellipse (…) Args- or args becomes a parameter pack
- Args is a template parameter pack, and args is a function parameter pack
- Parameter packs can only be packed or unpacked
- If the ellipse is left from Args, the parameter pack will be packed. If the ellipse is right from Arge, the parameter pack will be unpacked.

> The compiler can automatically deduce the template arguments.

Variadic Templates are often used in the Standard Template Library:
- sizeof-Operator, std::tuple, std::thread

The usage of parameter packs obeys a typical pattern.
- Perform an operation on the first element of the parameter pack and recursively invoke the operation on the remaining elements.
- The recursion ends after a finite number of steps.
- The boundary condition is typically a fully specialized template.

```
template<>
struct Mult<>{ ... }
template<int i, int ... tail >
struct Mult<i, tail ...>{ ...
```

# Examples
## Example 1
```
// templateVariadicTemplates.cpp

#include <iostream>

template <typename... Args>
int printSize(Args... args){
  return sizeof ...(args);
}

template<int ...>
struct Mult;

template<>
struct Mult<>{
  static const int value= 1;
};

template<int i, int ... tail>
struct Mult<i, tail ...>{
  static const int value= i * Mult<tail ...>::value;
};

int main(){

  std::cout << std::endl;

  std::cout << "printSize(): " << printSize() << std::endl;
  std::cout << "printSize(template,2011,true): " << printSize("template",2011,true) << std::endl;
  std::cout << "printSize(1, 2.5, 4, 5, 10): " <<  printSize(1, 2.5, 4, 5, 10) << std::endl;

  std::cout << std::endl;

  std::cout << "Mult<10>::value: " << Mult<10>::value << std::endl;
  std::cout << "Mult<10,10,10>::value: " << Mult<10,10,10>::value << std::endl;
  std::cout << "Mult<1,2,3,4,5>::value: " << Mult<1,2,3,4,5>::value << std::endl;

  std::cout << std::endl;

}
```


## Explanation 
- In the above example, we used a printSize function, which prints the number of elements (of any type) passed as arguments. It detects the number of elements on compile-time using the sizeof operator. In the case of an empty argument list, the function returns 0.
- There is a struct defined as Mult, which takes arguments of integer type and return their product. If no argument is passed, it returns 1, which is the neutral element for multiplication.
- The result is stored in the value, in the fully specialized template in lines 13 to 16. The partial specialization in lines 18 - 21 starts the recursion, which ends with the aforementioned fully specialization for 0.
- The primary template in line 10 is never used and must never be defined.

> The three dots ... (ellipse) is used before Args if parameters should be packed and after Args if they should be unpacked.

## Example 2
```
// templatePerfectForwarding.cpp

#include <iostream>
#include <string>
#include <utility>

template<typename T, typename ... Args>
T createT(Args&& ... args){
  return T(std::forward<Args>(args) ...);
}

struct MyStruct{
  MyStruct(int&, double&, double&&){}
  friend std::ostream& operator<< (std::ostream& out, const MyStruct&){
      out << "MyStruct" << std::endl;
      return out;
  }
};

int main(){

  std::cout << std::endl;

  double myDouble= createT<double>();
  std::cout << "myDouble: " << myDouble << std::endl;

  int myInt= createT<int>(1);
  std::cout << "myInt: " << myInt << std::endl;

  std::string myString= createT<std::string>("My String");
  std::cout << "myString: "  << myString << std::endl;

  MyStruct myStruct= createT<MyStruct>(myInt, myDouble, 3.14);
  std::cout << "myStruct: "  << myStruct << std::endl;

  std::cout << std::endl;
}
```
## Explanation 
- In the above example, we have created a createT function which invokes the constructor T with the arguments args. If no value is passed, it invokes the default constructor. The factory function createT can invoke each constructor.
- Due to perfect forwarding, each value can be used such as an lvalue or an rvalue. Due to parameter packs, each number of arguments can be used. In the case of MyStruct, a constructor requiring three arguments is used.
- The pattern of the function template createT is the same as the perfect factory functions, such as std::make_unique, std::make_shared, std::make_pair, or std::make_tuple.

> The three dots ... (ellipse) is used before Args if parameters should be packed and after Args if they should be unpacked.

In the next lesson, we will take a look at template arguments.
