# Templates: CRTP

In this lesson, we will learn about curiously recurring template patterns in modern C++.

We'll cover the following
- CRTP
- Typical use-case
  - Mixins
  - Static Polymorphism


# CRTP
The acronym CRTP stands for the C++ idiom Curiously Recurring Template Pattern. CRTP is a technique in Modern C++ in which a Derived class derives from a class template Base. The key is that Base has Derived as a template argument.

Let’s have a look at an example:
```
template<class T> 
class Base{
   ...
};

class Derived: public Base<Derived>{ 
   ...
};
```

> CRTP enables static polymorphism.

# Typical use-case
There are two typical use-cases for CRTP: Mixins and static polymorphism.

## Mixins
Mixinsis a popular concept in the design of classes used to mix in new code, meaning this technique it is commonly used in Python to change the behavior of a class by using multiple inheritances. In contrast to C++, in Python, it is possible to have more than one definition of a method in a class hierarchy. Python simply uses the method that is first in the Method Resolution Order (MRO).

You can implement mixins in C++ by using CRTP. A prominent example is the class std::enable_shared_from_this. By using this class, you can create objects that return an std::shared_ptr to themselves. We must derive your class MySharedClass public from std::enable_shared_from_this. Now, our class MySharedClass has a method, shared_from_this.

An additional typical use-case for mixins is for a class that you want to extend with the capability that their instances support the comparison for equality and inequality.

## Static Polymorphism
Static polymorphism is similar to dynamic polymorphism. Contrary to dynamic polymorphism with virtual methods, the dispatch of the method calls will take place at compile-time.

```
class ShareMe: public std::enable_shared_from_this<ShareMe>{
  std::shared_ptr<ShareMe> getShared(){
    return shared_from_this();
  } 
};
```

- std::enable_shared_from_this creates a shared _ptr for an object.
- std::enable_shared_from_this: base class of the object.
- shared_from_this: returns the shared object


# Examples
## Example 1
```
// crtpEquality.cpp

#include <iostream>
#include <string>

template<class Derived>
class Equality{};

template <class Derived>
bool operator == (Equality<Derived> const& op1, Equality<Derived> const & op2){
  Derived const& d1 = static_cast<Derived const&>(op1);     
  Derived const& d2 = static_cast<Derived const&>(op2); 
  return !(d1 < d2) && !(d2 < d1);
}

template <class Derived>
bool operator != (Equality<Derived> const& op1, Equality<Derived> const & op2){
  Derived const& d1 = static_cast<Derived const&>(op1);     
  Derived const& d2 = static_cast<Derived const&>(op2); 
  return !(d1 == d2);
}

struct Apple:public Equality<Apple>{
  Apple(int s): size{s}{};
  int size;
};

bool operator < (Apple const& a1, Apple const& a2){
  return a1.size < a2.size;
}

struct Man:public Equality<Man>{
  Man(const std::string& n): name{n}{}
  std::string name;
};

bool operator < (Man const& m1, Man const& m2){
  return m1.name < m2.name;
}


int main(){
  
  std::cout << std::boolalpha << std::endl;
  
  Apple apple1{5};
  Apple apple2{10}; 
  std::cout << "apple1 == apple2: " << (apple1 == apple2) << std::endl;
    
  Man man1{"grimm"};
  Man man2{"jaud"};
  std::cout << "man1 != man2: " << (man1 != man2) << std::endl;
  
  std::cout << std::endl;
    
}
```

## Explanation
- For the classes Apple and Man, we implemented the smaller operator (lines 28 and 37). We will only use the class Man for simplicity. The class Man is public derived (lines 32 - 35) from the class Equality<Man>.
- For classes of the kind Equality<Derived>, we implemented the equality (lines 9 - 14) and the inequality operator (lines 16 - 21). The inequality operator uses the equality operator (line 20).
- The equality operator relies on the fact that the smaller operator is implemented for Derived (line 13). The equality operator and inequality operator convert their operands: Derived const&: Derived const& d1 = static_cast<Derived const&>(op1).
- Now, we can compare Apple and Man for equality and inequality in the main program.
  
  ## Example 2
  ```
  // templateCRTP.cpp

#include <iostream>

template <typename Derived>
struct Base{
  void interface(){
    static_cast<Derived*>(this)->implementation();
  }
  
  void implementation(){
    std::cout << "Implementation Base" << std::endl;
  }
};

struct Derived1: Base<Derived1>{
  void implementation(){
    std::cout << "Implementation Derived1" << std::endl;
  }
};

struct Derived2: Base<Derived2>{
  void implementation(){
    std::cout << "Implementation Derived2" << std::endl;
  }
};

struct Derived3: Base<Derived3>{};

template <typename T>
void execute(T& base){
    base.interface();
}


int main(){
  
  std::cout << std::endl;
  
  Derived1 d1;
  execute(d1);
    
  Derived2 d2;
  execute(d2);
  
  Derived3 d3;
  execute(d3);
  
  std::cout << std::endl;
  
}
```

## Explanation
*In the function template execute (lines 30-33), we used static polymorphism.

- On each argument, we invoked the base method base.interface. The method Base::interface in lines 7 - 9 is the key point of the CRTP idiom. The methods dispatch to the implementation of the derived class: static_cast<Derived*>(this)->implementation().This is possible since the method is instantiated when called.
- Now, the derived classes Derived1, Derived2, and Derived3 are fully defined. Therefore, the method Base::interface can use the details of its derived classes. Especially interesting is the method Base::implementation (lines 11 - 13).
- This method plays the role of a default implementation of the static polymorphism for the class Derived3 (line 28).

Now that we have completed the section on, High Performance in Embedded Programming with Modern C++, we will discuss how to work with Reduced Resources in embedded programming in the next lesson.
  
  
