# Scoped Enumerations
In this lesson, we will learn about Enumerations or Enums
We'll cover the following
- Drawbacks of Enumerations in Classical C++
- Strongly-typed Enumerations

**Enumerations** conveniently define integer constants with names. These integer constants are called enumerators. Let’s go over some of the drawbacks of using classic enums.

# Drawbacks of Enumerations in Classical C++
A short reminder. Three drawbacks of enumerations:
1. The enumerators implicitly convert to int.
2. They introduce the enumerators in the enclosing scope.
3. The type of the enumeration cannot be specified.
Regarding point 3, enumerations cannot be forward declared since their type unknown. We can only the guarantee for the enumerators in classical C++. The type must be integral and large enough to hold the enumerators.

Points 1 and 2 are more surprising.
```
// enumClassic.cpp

#include <iostream>

int main(){
	
  std::cout << std::endl;
	
  enum Colour{red= 0,green= 2,blue};
  
  std::cout << "red: " << red << std::endl;
  std::cout << "green: " << green << std::endl;
  std::cout << "blue: " << blue << std::endl;
  
  int red2= red;
  
  std::cout << "red2: " << red2 << std::endl;
  
  // int red= 5;  ERROR
  
}
```
On the one hand, the enumerators red, green, and blue are known in the enclosing scope, meaning that the definition of the variable red in line 19 is not possible. On the other hand, red can be implicitly converted to int.
If we do not use a name for an enumeration like enum{red, green, blue}, the enumerators will be introduced in the enclosing scope.
But that surprise ends with C++11. Now that we have gone over the drawbacks, let’s move on to strongly-typed enumerations.

# Strongly-typed Enumerations
Scoped enumerations are often called strongly-typed enumerations. The strongly-typed enumerations have to follow stronger rules:
1. The enumerators can only be accessed in the scope of the enumeration.
2. The enumerators don’t implicitly convert to int.
3. The enumerators aren’t imported in the enclosing scope.
4. The type of the enumerators is by default int. Therefore, we can forward the enumeration.
The syntactical difference between the classic enumerations and the strongly-typed enumerations is minimal. The strongly-typed enumerations additionally get the keyword class or struct.
If we want to use an enumerator as an int, we have to explicitly convert it with static_cast.

```
// enumCast.cpp

#include <iostream>

enum OldEnum{
  one= 1,
  ten=10,
  hundred=100,
  thousand= 1000
};

enum struct NewEnum{
  one= 1,
  ten=10,
  hundred=100,
  thousand= 1000
};

int main(){
	
  std::cout << std::endl;

  std::cout << "C++11= " << 2*thousand + 0*hundred + 1*ten + 1*one << std::endl;
  std::cout << "C++11= " << 2*static_cast<int>(NewEnum::thousand) + 
                            0*static_cast<int>(NewEnum::hundred) + 
                            1*static_cast<int>(NewEnum::ten) + 
	                    1*static_cast<int>(NewEnum::one) << std::endl;

}
```
In order to calculate or output the enumerators, we must convert the enumerators into integral types. Neither the addition nor the output of strongly-typed enumerations is defined.
In this lesson, we have discussed classical versus strongly-typed enumerations. Commonly, these are known as scoped and unscoped enumerations.
Let’s look at an example of this topic in the next lesson.

# -Example
We can explicitly specify the type of enumerators. By default, it’s int however, we can change the type being used. We can use integral types such bool, char, short int, long int, or, long long int. Read msdn.microsoft.com for the details. Read the post Check types to see as to how we can check at compile time if a type is integral.
We can independently use the scoped property and the explicit type specification of an enumeration. Dependent on the base types, the enumerations have different sizes.
Below is an example of the implementation of scoped enumerations using struct and class.
```
//enum.cpp
#include <iostream>

enum class Color1{
  red,
  blue,
  green
};

enum struct Color2: char{
  red = 100,
  blue, // 101
  green // 102
};

void useMe(Color2 color2){

  switch(color2){
  case Color2::red:
    std::cout << "Color2::red" << std::endl;
    break;
  case Color2::blue:
    std::cout << "Color2::blue" << std::endl;
    break;
  case Color2::green:
    std::cout << "Color2::green" << std::endl;
    break;
  }

}


int main(){

  std::cout << std::endl;

  std::cout <<  "static_cast<int>(Color1::red): " <<  static_cast<int>(Color1::red) << std::endl;
  std::cout <<  "static_cast<int>(Color2::red): " <<  static_cast<int>(Color2::red) << std::endl;

  std::cout << std::endl;

  std::cout << "sizeof(Color1)= "  << sizeof(Color1) << std::endl;    //int
  std::cout << "sizeof(Color2)= "  << sizeof(Color2) << std::endl;    //char

  std::cout << std::endl;

  Color2 color2Red{Color2::red};
  useMe(color2Red);

  std::cout << std::endl;

}
```
In the next lesson, we will learn about nullptr in modern C++.
