# nullptr Instead of 0 or NULL
In this lesson, we will learn how new null pointer nullptr cleans up in C++ with the ambiguity of the number 0 and the macro NULL.

We'll cover the following
- The Number 0
- The macro NULL
- nullptr - The Null Pointer Constant
- Generic Code

# The Number 0
The issue with the literal 0 is that it can be either the null pointer (void*)0 or the number 0 depending on the context of the problem in question.

Therefore, programs using the number 0 should be confusing.
```
// null.cpp

#include <iostream>
#include <typeinfo>

int main(){

  std::cout << std::endl;

  int a = 0;
  int* b = 0;
  auto c = 0;
  std::cout << typeid(c).name() << std::endl;

  auto res = a + b + c;
  std::cout << "res: " << res << std::endl;
  std::cout << typeid(res).name() << std::endl;
  
  std::cout << std::endl;

}
```
The question remains, what is the data type of variable c in line 12 and of variable res in line 15?

The variable c is of type int and the variable res is of type pointer to int: int*. Pretty simple, right? The expression a + b + c in line 15 is pointer arithmetic.

# The macro NULL
The issue with the null pointer NULL is that it implicitly converts to int.

According to en.cppreference.com the macro NULL is an implemenentation-defined null pointer constant. A possible implementation is as follows:
```
#define NULL 0
//since C++11
#define NULL nullptr
```

But that will not apply to our platform. NULL seems to be of the type long int. We will return to this point later. The usage of the macro NULL raises some questions.
```
// nullMacro.cpp

#include <iostream>
#include <typeinfo>

std::string overloadTest(int){
  return "int";
}

std::string overloadTest(long int){
  return "long int";
}


int main(){

  std::cout << std::endl;
  
  int a = NULL;
  int* b = NULL;
  auto c = NULL;
  // std::cout << typeid(c).name() << std::endl;
  // std::cout << typeid(NULL).name() << std::endl;
  
  
  std::cout << "overloadTest(NULL) = " << overloadTest(NULL) << std::endl;
  
  std::cout << std::endl;

}
```
The compiler complains about the implicit conversion to int in line 19. The warning in line 21 is confusing. The compiler automatically deduces the type of the variable c to long int. At the same time, it complains that the expression NULL must be converted. Our observation is in accordance with the call overloadTest(NULL) in line 26. The compiler uses the version for the type long int (line 10). If the implementation uses NULL of type int, the compiler will choose overloadTest for the parameter type int (line 6), which is according to the C++ standard.

Now, we want to know the current type of the null pointer constant NULL. Therefore, we will comment out lines 22 and 23 of the program.

```
// nullMacro.cpp

#include <iostream>
#include <typeinfo>

std::string overloadTest(int){
  return "int";
}

std::string overloadTest(long int){
  return "long int";
}


int main(){

  std::cout << std::endl;
  
  int a = NULL;
  int* b = NULL;
  auto c = NULL;
  std::cout << typeid(c).name() << std::endl;
  std::cout << typeid(NULL).name() << std::endl;
  
  
  std::cout << "overloadTest(NULL) = " << overloadTest(NULL) << std::endl;
  
  std::cout << std::endl;

}
```
One one hand, NULL seems to be of type long int but on the other hand, it seems to be a constant pointer. This behavior shows the compilation of the above program.

So, we can conclude the following: Don’t use the macro NULL.

The new null pointer constant nullptr can solve this problem.

# nullptr - The Null Pointer Constant
The new null pointer nullptr cleans up in C++, with the ambiguity of the number 0 and the macro NULL. nullptr is and remains of type std::nullptr_t.

We can assign arbitrary pointers to a nullptr. The pointer becomes a null pointer and points to no data. We cannot dereference a nullptr. However, pointers of this type can be compared with all pointers and be converted to all pointers. This also holds true for pointers to class members, but we cannot compare and convert a nullptr to an integral type. There is one exception to this rule: we can implicitly compare and convert a bool value with a nullptr, meaning that we can use a nullptr in a logical expression.

# Generic Code
In the generic code, the literal 0 and NULL reveal their true nature. Due to template argument deduction, both literals are integral types in the function template. There is no indication that both literals were null pointer constants.
```
// generic.cpp

#include <cstddef>
#include <iostream>
 
template<class P >
void functionTemplate(P p){
  int* a = p;
}
 
int main(){
  int* a = 0;           
  int* b = NULL;              
  int* c = nullptr;
 
  functionTemplate(0);   
  functionTemplate(NULL);
  functionTemplate(nullptr);  
}
```
We can use 0 and NULL to initialize the int pointer in line 12 and 13. However, if we use the values 0 and NULL as arguments of the function template, the compiler will loudly complain. The compiler deduces 0 in the function template to type int, and it deduces NULL to the type long int. These observations will not hold true for the nullptr,however.

The example in the next lesson will further your understanding of this concept.

# -Example
```
// nullptr.cpp
#include <iostream>
#include <string>

std::string overloadTest(char*){
  return "char*";
}

std::string overloadTest(int){
  return "int";
}

std::string overloadTest(long int){
  return "long int";
}

std::string test2(char*){
  return "char*";
}

int main(){

  std::cout << std::endl;

  int* pi = nullptr;    // OK
  // int i= nullptr;       // cannot convert ‘std::nullptr_t’ to ‘int’
  bool b{nullptr};      // OK. b is false.

  std::cout << std::boolalpha << "b: "  << b << std::endl;

  // calls int
  std::cout << "overloadTest(0) = " <<  overloadTest(0) << std::endl;

  // calls char*
  std::cout<< "overloadTest(static_cast<char*>(0))= " << overloadTest(static_cast<char*>(0)) << std::endl;
  std::cout<< "test2(0)= " << test2(0) << std::endl;

  // calls char*
  std::cout << "overloadTest(nullptr)= " <<  overloadTest(nullptr)<< std::endl;

  // call of overloaded ‘overloadTest(NULL)’ is ambiguous
  // std::cout << "overloadTest(NULL)= " << overloadTest(NULL) << std::endl;

  std::cout << std::endl;

}
```

# Explanation
- The nullptr can be used to initialize a pointer of type int (line 25). However, the nullptr cannot be used to initialize a variable of type int (line 26).
- The null pointer constant behaves like a boolean value, which is initialized with false (line 27). If the nullptr has to decide between a long int and a pointer, it will result in a pointer (line 39).

> **Simple rule to remember:** Use nullptr instead of 0 or NULL.

The next lesson will introduce you to the user-defined literals.
