# Assertions at Compile Time
In this lesson, we will learn about assertions at compile time in modern C++.

We'll cover the following
- static_assert

static_assert is the tool in modern C++ used to make our code safe.

# static_assert
The usage of static_assert is quite easy. static_assert requires an expression and a string. The expression must be predicate that can be evaluated at compile time. Predicate means the expression returns true or false. If the expression evaluates to false, we will get an error message at compile-time with the string as a message. Of course, we get no executable.

There are a few points we must consider.

- The static_assert expression will be evaluated at compile-time, and we have no runtime overhead.
- Expressions that can be evaluated at compile time are called constant expressions.
- We can use static_assert expressions in all parts of our program. Therefore, it is a good idea to put general requirements on our source code in a separate header. As a result, the static_assert expression will be automatically verified at compile time if we include the header. This helps to port our code to a new platform since we can easily check if the new platform supports the type requirements.

The example in the next lesson will build on your understanding of this concept.

## Example
```
 // staticAssert.cpp
#include <iostream>
#include <type_traits>

template< class T >
struct Add{

  // check the assertion
  static_assert(std::is_arithmetic<T>::value, "Argument T must be an arithmetic type");

} ;

int main(){

  // will work 
  static_assert(sizeof(void*) >= 8, "64-bit addressing is required for this program");

  // int is arithmetic
  Add<int> addInt= Add<int>();

  // double is arithmetic
  Add<double> addDouble= Add<double>();

  // char is arithmetic
  Add<char> addChar= Add<char>();

  // std::string is not arithmetic
  Add<std::string> addString= Add<std::string>(); // if you comment this line, the code will run fine

}
```

## Explanation
The program uses static_assert in the class scope (line 9) and the local scope (line 16). The assertions in the class definition guarantee that the structure is initialized with an arithmetic type, explaining why the template instantiation in line 28 is not valid.

Let’s test your understanding of this concept with an exercise in the next lesson.


## -Exercise
In this lesson, you will use assertations to ensure that the algorithm only accepts natural numbers.

We'll cover the following
- Task

## Task
Ensure that the algorithm gcd only accepts natural numbers. Test your algorithm.

```
// C++ 14
#include <iostream>
using namespace std;
template<typename T> T gcd(T a, T b){
  if( b == 0 ){
    return a;
  } 
  else{
    return gcd(b, a % b);
  }
}
int main(){
  return 0;
}
```

## Solution
In this lesson, we will look at the solution to using assertations to ensure that the algorithm only accepts natural numbers.

## Example
```
// staticAssertGcd.cpp

#include <iostream>
#include <type_traits>

template<typename T>
T gcd(T a, T b){
  static_assert(std::is_integral<T>::value, "T should be an integral type!");
  if( b == 0 ){ return a; }
  else{
    return gcd(b, a % b);
  }
}

int main(){

  std::cout << std::endl;

  std::cout << gcd(3.5, 4.0)<< std::endl; // should be gcd(3, 4)
  std::cout << gcd("100", "10") << std::endl; // should be gcd(100, 10)

  std::cout << std::endl;

}
```

## Explanation
The static_assert operator and the predicate std::is_integral<T>::value enable us to check at compile time whether or not T is an integral type. A predicate always returns a boolean value.

The compilation will not fail by accident since the modulo operator is not defined for a double value and a C string, but the compilation fails since the assertion in line 8 will not hold true. Now, we get an exact error message rather than a cryptic output of a failed template instantiation.
  
> The rule is quite simple: **If a compilation must fail, we will get an unambiguous error message. **
  
The power of static_assert can be evaluated at compile time. We have the new type-traits library in C++11. The powerful type-traits library empowers you to check, compare, and change types at compile time. We will discuss this concept in the next section.
